Project Proposal

### Introduction
The three-day NFL Draft is the one of the most critical days of the calendar year for NFL franchises because players selected can set up a team’s future for years to come or set them back for a long time. Many comparisons and eye-tests are used by front-offices and scouts to pick “their guy” in the draft, but every process has its flaws. In this project, we are predicting NFL career success of skill players (quarterbacks, running backs, wide receivers, and tight ends) in the upcoming draft by using collegiate data and former drafted players as reference points. In this new approach, we are using machine learning on the collegiate data to create a score that values player success, then run a clustering model to compare players in the draft class and previously drafted players. We find these two models as the most optimal for this problem because they are better at separating hype around players, letting the numbers do the talking. Our stakeholders in this project will be NFL front-offices and coaches, as well as any media outlets that make NFL Draft predictions. In the case of the front-offices and coaches, a successful project will help improve scouting departments and simplify draft-day decisions due to having an algorithm that shows which skill players can have the best careers. For media outlets, this impacts any analyst or personality that shares their mock drafts as the season comes to a close. This project would help solidify who the top players are, reducing noise in which players A and B will have better careers than players C and D. 


### Data
We will utilize data from the [collegefootballdata.com](https://collegefootballdata.com/exporter/draft/picks) database & the [nflreadpy](https://github.com/nflverse/nflreadpy) package in Python. The collegefootballdata.com database which collects season level college football data going back to 2014 as well as draft information on each player. It collects advanced metrics such as average & total Predicted Points Added, which evaluates total number of points a player added to their offense, Usage Rate, which evaluates how often the player is utilized in the offense, & other basic box score statistics such as Passing Yards, Rushing Yards, TDs, etc. Variables are included in a glossary on the College Football Data webpage, and data is updated on a consistent basis to ensure up-to-date, accurate information. Nflreadpy will allow me to scrape draft data with player performance in the NFL, graded as [Weighted Approximate Value](https://www.pro-football-reference.com/about/approximate_value.htm), a measure created by pro-football-reference to evaluate & compare player performance across different positions with a single number. The ultimate goal is to join this draft data onto college football data’s draft data based on year, name, position, & pick number, which will then allow us to join on player id for the usage & predicted points added tables. Currently, a merged dataframe of usage and predicted points added statistics has over 27,000 rows & roughly 30 columns after filtering for D1 players. 

### Methods
Our aim is to build a regression machine learning model that predicts a player’s Weighted Approximate Value based on college stats, predicted points added, usage rate, position, conference, & other basic statistics. Conference & position variables will require us to transform them into dummy variables so that the data can be transformed into a matrix format. Similarly, we will add a dummy variable for power 4 conferences, as these conferences are considered to be the very best in all of college football and as a result, have the best players in college football. This will allow the model to favor these players in their predictions as the lower values within these conferences could be due to going up against better competition rather than being worse to someone from a weaker conference. Another thing that we’ll need to do is scale the continuous features in our model. Our features are going to be on different scales, especially if we mix rate stats with season stats, so it’s important that we scale them so the model doesn’t favor one over the other when the model is being built out. Another avenue we want to explore is creating player similarity scores for players in the upcoming draft through a clustering process. This would help evaluators get a better idea of each player’s archetype and how that archetype may or may not fit their offensive system. We will use root mean squared error to evaluate our model’s accuracy, ensuring that our model provides us with accurate estimates that we can rely on in the future. 


Risks: 

Hunter's notes- Team needs (not all need skill players), shockers (reaching for players, players falling down draft boards, trades), evaluating different archetypes of players (receiving back - CMC vs. workhorse back - Derrick Henry, blocking tight end vs. receiving tight end, yards after catch receiver vs. other)
